---
title: Tesco and how retail has evolved alongside modern technology
author: Eden Miles
date: 2026
---

## Introduction

The way supermarkets operated 20 to 30 years ago differs vastly to the modern day, mostly due to the incorporation of computing technology. Tesco, one of the UK’s largest supermarket chains, is the clearest example of how things like hardware, software and digital systems can help a company grow, both in efficiency and the way they connect with customers. This article is here to explain and explore how the development of computers has affected Tesco, the risks of introducing new systems, and the possible impacts of technologies such as generative AI, robotics, and the Internet of Things (IoT).

## The impact of modern technology on Tesco (Isacc, 2025)

Tesco, which was founded in 1919, has changed in a multitude of ways since. In the 1990’s, Tesco relied on tills, paper records and manual stock checking, whereas in the modern day nearly every part of how Tesco runs is supported by computer systems. Modern systems are now able to track product sales in real time. When an item is sold, Tesco’s systems will automatically update stock levels and can even in some cases reorder products before the shelves even have the chance to run out.

Tesco’s infrastructure evolved massively with the shift from fixed desktop terminals to mobile computing for staff. Shop floor employees could now use Handheld Terminals (HHTs) and wearable scanners to perform stock checks, gap analysis, and price reductions directly from the aisle. This was massively better than the manual (and outdated) methods of the 1990s. These mobile devices would connect via secure Wi-Fi to Tesco’s central Data Warehouse, ensuring that the data is always recorded and read in real time. As soon as a staff member scans a low stock item, the reordering system is triggered instantly.

Along side this, management staff now use tablets and Bring Your Own Device (BYOD) policies to monitor store KPIs (Key Performance Indicators) without having to head to a static location which removes the need to be tethered to a back office desk. This mobility significantly improves efficiency and allows for a more dynamic response to customer needs, and actually shows a increase in employee morale with the gain in physical activity.

The rise of the internet and through the development of web technologies, Tesco was able to move past the traditional physical store shopping by launching its online platform tesco.com (and later a mobile app). This new online tool lets customers shop from anywhere, doing things like ordering/tracking deliveries, and use digital loyalty cards (more on that later). This massive expansion into online services helped Tesco to massively increase their customer base, especially to those who value convenience and flexibility over everything else.

Modern Tesco has moved away from purely on site servers to a Hybrid Cloud model this is due to the shear amount of data they have to deal with. The new architecture allows the company to keep sensitive financial data and core legacy systems on private, secure servers (Private Cloud) while still making use of the immense scalability of the public cloud (AWS or Azure) to handle its customer facing website and app traffic. This is shown to be especially critical for maintaining stability during peak shopping periods like Christmas or Black Friday. The public cloud can have sudden bursts of users but with proper usage it can handle millions of simultaneous connections without crashing the internal stock systems. This flexibility reduces the cost of maintaining idle servers year round and allows for close to 100% uptime for customers.

There is also an energy benefit from shifting processing power to the Public Cloud (AWS) as it significantly improves Energy Management. AWS data centres utilise hyper scale cooling and power efficiency technologies that are far greener than running thousands of inefficient, separate servers in the back offices of individual Tesco stores.

The advancements in computer hardware and software have also further led to the introduction of self-service checkouts and contactless payments, which helped make shopping faster, reduce queues, and lower staffing costs. By adopting these innovations Tesco was able to improve both efficiency and customer satisfaction.

Recognising a major opportunity to use data strategically, Tesco transformed from a traditional retailer into a powerful data driven organisation and this was done by purchasing a majority stake in the analytics firm Dunnhumby in 2001. This shift became most visible to the public through the introduction of the Tesco Club card, which replaced a very outdated paper systems with a personalised rewards program. While customers enjoyed tailored deals and savings, the company operated behind the scenes as a major controller of consumer information, utilising big data to study behaviour in insane amounts detail.

To maintain its competitive edge Tesco started to process massive amounts of information by high volume, velocity, and variety all across its, in store, online, and mobile platforms. Tesco makes use of a Data Warehouse which is a system very different from live operational databases. Unlike volatile till systems, this warehouse stores read only historical data and uses Data Denormalisation and is Subject-Oriented which means it is organised by customer/product. The company was able to analyses millions of real time transactions to predict customer needs and purchasing patterns of which allow Tesco to optimise stock levels, create highly targeted marketing offers, and even redesign store layouts based on predicted customer flows, ensuring that every single decision the company made was backed, by at the time, one of the largest amounts of data analytics.

## Emerging technologies and their impact on Tesco

The future of shopping looks like this. Tesco is actively shifting towards an era of Ubiquitous Computing this is where computing power is no longer confined to screens but is instead embedded into of the store environment. This is achieved through Internet of Things (IoT), a network of connected physical devices that communicate data without human intervention. Tesco has been deploying thousands of IoT sensors across its stores.

For example they have recently introduced 'smart shelves' equipped with weight sensors which can detect when a product line is low and automatically trigger a restocking request to the warehouse system, this has also been tested in their new GetGo stores which are meant as a cashless, checkout free shopping experience. Temperature monitoring sensors are also placed in refrigeration units to constantly transmit environmental data to the cloud which means that if a fridge temperature rises even slightly above the safety threshold, an alert is sent to maintenance staff. This moves the company from fixing things after they break and food spoils, to a more proactive one, solving problems ahead of time, which has significantly reduced their food waste and energy costs. These connected devices create a 'smart environment' where the store itself manages its own health and inventory.

Artificial Intelligence is another thing shaping Tesco’s future. AI can rapidly analyse customer behaviour to predict buying patterns, automate restocking processes, and plan efficient delivery routes. It can also be used in customer service through chatbots, which allow customers to receive quick assistance and information at any time of the day, reducing staffing cost.

Whether for better or for worse automation is fundamentally transforming how Tesco logically runs itself, with examples like the deployment of Automated Guided Vehicles (AGVs) and robotic picking arms in its fulfilment centres. These machines are able to use computer vision and sensors to identify, pick, and pack grocery orders at a speed significantly exceeding human capabilities. This reduces error rates (wrong items) and increases throughput, which is essential for meeting the high velocity of online orders.

However, the adoption of this technology presents a significant technical challenge of System Integration. Tesco’s core inventory databases may be decades old (Legacy Systems), originally designed to print paper lists for human workers. Modern robots are extremely different to humans and require precise, digital instructions via APIs (Application Programming Interfaces). Getting these modern robots to communicate seamlessly with older legacy infrastructure requires complex middleware software. And if not not managed correctly data synchronisation errors will occur, where the robot believes an item is in stock when the main database shows it is empty, leading to operational failures.

All of this technology and its use has tough moral and ethical considerations. While Tesco tries to portray its technological evolution as a convenience for customers, especially through the use of parasocial relationship, when looked at from a more moral and ethical view, my evaluation reveals a colder, more calculated objective which is the systematic removal of the human element from the retail experience to maximise profit margins.

This is most obviously demonstrated with the rollout of Tesco GetGo stores, which use the concept of 'just walk out' technology. By covering the ceiling in cameras and weight sensors to track customers' every movement, Tesco has created a sterile, surveillance heavy environment where the traditional 'shopkeeper' interaction is entirely eradicated. This shift raises a lot of ethical questions about the devaluation of human labour. Although Tesco often claims that automation 'frees up staff' for other roles this is a blatant stretch of truth.

What I think is the long term trajectory of Tesco is a business model that views human employees as a liability rather than an asset. The replacement of entry level jobs, which are often used as a lifeline for students, the elderly, or the low skilled, in favour of high efficiency algorithms and robots risks widening the currently rampant digital divide. By forcing customers to interact with machines and apps rather than people, Tesco risks alienating vulnerable demographics, such as the elderly or people without bank accounts, effectively telling them that if they cannot engage with a machine, they are no longer a valued customer. The result is a highly efficient business that functions with machine precision but fundamentally lacks the warmth, empathy, and social value of a community focused organisation. A community focus that Tesco tries to trick customers into believing through the use community action stations and Social Media presence.

## Risks and Challenges of modern digital dependence

One of the most significant technical risks Tesco faces is Legacy System Incompatibility. As the company was established over a century ago the core infrastructure it runs on likely relies on older 'legacy' systems for stability. Although integrating modern, high-speed IoT sensors and cloud-based APIs is great, when combined with these older systems a high risk of data corruption or synchronisation errors becomes prevalent. Such as if the 'middleware' (software that connects the new to the old) fails, the modern website might display stock that the old warehouse system knows doesn't exist. The compatibility gap makes every upgrade Tesco takes both risky and expensive as testing is required to make sure that new innovations do not break the core business operations.

As Tesco analytical systems are able to gather vast amounts of Personally Identifiable Information (PII) and financial data it very quickly becomes a prime target for cyber criminals. Beyond simple concepts like 'hacking' Tesco also faces much more specific threats like Ransomware, where attackers encrypt critical data and demand payment for its release, potentially halting supply chains entirely.

Tesco’s reliance on the public cloud for tesco.com exposes the company to Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks. In which malicious actors flood the website with fake traffic to lead the server to crash. For a high volume retailer like Tesco, even 10 minutes of downtime during a peak period like Black Friday could result in millions of pounds in lost revenue and significant reputational damage.

Tesco cannot simply rely on backups to lessen these risks it also requires a comprehensive Disaster Recovery Plan (DRP) of which involves implementing Redundancy and Failover systems. If Tesco’s primary data centre in London goes offline due to a power outage or fire, a secondary data centre in a different geographic location must automatically take over operations instantly, maintaining these often idle or redundant systems can also be extremely costly. On top of all this the sheer volume of data collected creates the risk of Information Overload and data duplication, in which the cost of processing and storing noise data (data which is useless) begins to actually outweigh the value of the insights it provides.

## Impact on Stakeholders

With the integration of complex systems like Hybrid Cloud and Big Data analytics many key stakeholders at Tesco have been affected in a multitude of ways. The impact is a big trade off between efficiency, privacy, and job security.

For Tesco’s main workforce (Cashier, stock checker’s, etc.), the impact is very divided. On one hand automation has led to a significant reduction in low skilled roles (such as cashiers replaced by self-service, pickers replaced by robots). However this shift requires more Upskilling. There has been a big change in working practices where staff are now expected and required to manage complex Handheld Terminals (HHTs) and interpret data rather than just lift boxes. While this offers career progression for those able to adapt to IT heavy roles people able to do this are in the minority with the majority now at a risk of unemployment due to the ever growing digital skills gap and lack of computer literacy in the majority of people, which leads to a workforce that is smaller but more technically capable, something that is great for a corporate business are those that are technologically skilled but also can have a massive negative impact on a general population.

Suppliers are now interlinked to Tesco’s modern data architecture. The use of real time sales data has allowed for Just In Time (JIT) supply chains, where stock is ordered automatically only when needed. This can massively benefit suppliers by reducing their own storage costs and demand spikes. But it also creates a dangerous dependency such as if Tesco’s 'Middleware' is ever to fail or a successful cyber attack occurs, the flow of data stops, and the entire supply chain freezes instantly. Due to modernisation there is no longer a buffer of manual paperwork to fall back on instead the suppliers' success is entirely reliant on the uptime of Tesco’s servers.

Customers undoubtedly benefit from the convenience of the current landscape of Tesco shopping and the personalised offers generated by Dunnhumby’s data mining, but this brings along with it a ethical cost. By using the Club card and shopping online, customers are selling their data for often small financial discounts and for those who don’t Tesco punishes them with much harsher non club card prices. You also have the risk of Data Mining where Tesco’s analytics are so strong that they can predict private life events (such as pregnancy or health issues) based on shopping habits. While customers enjoy the savings, they must trust that Tesco’s Cybersecurity measures are good enough to protect this sensitive personal shopping 'Profile' from theft or misuse.

For owners and shareholders the new adoption of automation and AI has driven massive efficiency, it has lowered wage bills and increased profit margins. The transition to a data driven business model has strengthened Tesco’s competitive edge against other supermarket rivals (Aldi, Sainsbury). But it this tech heavy strategy has also given them high impact financial risks. Even just a single successful Ransomware attack or a prolonged failure of the Hybrid Cloud system could wipe out millions in revenue overnight. Shareholders are essentially betting that the increased daily profits are worth the risk of although rare still extremely catastrophic failure.

## Conclusion

With the development in technology Tesco has evolved massively going from a supermarket relying on manual labour to a highly digital organisation, instead of just human resources Tesco now depends on computers, automation, and data to stay above the competition and emerging technologies such as AI and IoT will only continue to shape the company in the future. To benefit from this, Tesco will have to find a way to manage the risks that come along with it, and a focus will have to be put on things like cybersecurity, staff training and a balance of technology to human needs.

## Bibliography

* Davis, G. (2025, January 22). _Clubcard at 30 the evolution of retail loyalty_. Retrieved from Computer Weekly: [https://www.computerweekly.com/feature/Clubcard-at-30-the-evolution-of-retail-loyalty](https://www.computerweekly.com/feature/Clubcard-at-30-the-evolution-of-retail-loyalty)
* Dunnhumby. (n.d.). _Tesco media insight platform_. Retrieved from Dunnhumby: [https://www.dunnhumby.com/tesco-media-insight-platform/](https://www.dunnhumby.com/tesco-media-insight-platform/)
* Isacc. (2025, September 21). _The Supermarket Loyalty Card Problem_. Retrieved from Youtube: [https://youtu.be/a5eiPabOWsc?si=yfNA-DuHvbXZbqyn](https://youtu.be/a5eiPabOWsc?si=yfNA-DuHvbXZbqyn)
* _Tesco saves millions with supply chain alalytics_. (2013, April 16). Retrieved from Information Age: [https://www.information-age.com/tesco-saves-millions-with-supply-chain-analytics-28097/](https://www.information-age.com/tesco-saves-millions-with-supply-chain-analytics-28097/)